Add first draft of CNAB under the hood, still some TODOs (#8)
silvin-lubecki/docker-app-workshop-dc19: exercises/exercise_6/README.md

# Exercise 6 - CNAB Under the Hood

> **Time**: Approximately 15 minutes
> **Difficulty**: Medium

## Table of Contents
1. [What is CNAB](#what-is-cnab)
1. [Create a CNAB Bundle from scratch](#create-a-cnab-bundle-from-scratch)
1. [Docker App CNAB Runtime](#docker-app-cnab-runtime)

## Exercise Objectives

By the end of this exercise you will:

- Have a first glance on the new CNAB Specifications
- Learn how to create a CNAB from scratch
- Learn how to use Docker App as a CNAB client

## What is CNAB

CNAB, or [Cloud Native Application Bundle](https://cnab.io), is a new packaging standard describing how to manage an application lifecyle, from installation, upgrade, to uninstallation. It aims to become the `.deb` (or `.msi`) for your cloud applications.

> **NOTE**: About the status of this format, the specification is still at `Draft` level, but the core concepts are finalized and stabilized. There won't be any breaking change since the 1.0.0 release of the specifications, which will come very soon. By the way, **contributions are welcome**!

Reviewer: Since -> until

> **NOTE**: About the status of this format, the specification is still at `Draft` level, but the core concepts are finalized and stabilized. There won't be any breaking change unitl the 1.0.0 release of the specifications, which will come very soon. By the way, **contributions are welcome**!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**NOTE**: Concerning the status of this format, the specification is still at `Draft` level, but the core concepts are finalized and stabilized. There won't be any breaking change until the 1.0.0 release of the specifications, which will come very soon. By the way, **contributions are welcome**!
```

Before we start digging into the format, here are some CNAB key terms (shamelessly copied from the [specifications](https://github.com/deislabs/cnab-spec/blob/master/100-CNAB.md)):
> * **Application**: The functional unit composed by the components described in a bundle. This MAY be comprised of a mixture of containers, VMs, IaaS and PaaS definitions, and other services, as * well as instructions for orchestrators and service frameworks.
> * **Bundle**: the collection of CNAB data and metadata necessary for installing an application on the designated cloud services.
> * **Bundle definition**: The information about a bundle, its parameters, credentials, images, and usage
> * **bundle.json**: The unsigned JSON-encoded representation of a bundle definition.

> > * **bundle.cnab**: The signed JSON-encoded representation of a bundle definition.

Reviewer: Does not exist anymore I think

> * **Invocation Image**: The image that contains the bootstrapping and installation logic for the bundle
> * **Registry**: A storage and retrieval service for CNAB objects.
> * **Claim**: A stored installation result
>
> Also, when referencing tooling, we use the following terms:
> * **CNAB runtime** or runtime: A program capable of reading a CNAB bundle and executing it
> * **CNAB builder** or builder: A program that can assemble a CNAB bundle

> > * **bundle tooling**: Programs or tooling that generate CNAB bundle contents

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> * **bundle tooling**: Programs or tooling that generate CNAB bundle content
```

To summarize, a CNAB Bundle is the sum of two artifacts:

> - a JSON file `bundle.json` defining the application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- a `bundle.json` file defining the application
```

> - multiple invocation images, either Docker images or Virtual Machine images

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- multiple invocation images, which can consist of either Docker images or Virtual Machine images
```

### Bundle.json

> The first artifact is the bundle file, defining the following parts:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first artifact is the bundle file, which defines the following parts:
```

- Metadata: application name, version, description, maintainers
- List of invocation images
- List of component images (compose services in our case)
- Custom actions: every bundle must implement the 3 mandatory actions **install**/**upgrade**/**uninstall**
- Parameters for these actions
- Credentials

Here is an example of a simple `bundle.json`:

```json
{
	"name": "simple",
	"version": "1.0.0",
	"description": "a very simple application",
	"maintainers": [
		{
			"name": "DAP Workshop",
			"email": "dapworkshop@docker.com"
		}
	],
	"invocationImages": [
		{
			"imageType": "docker",
			"image": "simple:1.0.0-invoc"
		}
	],
	"images": {
		"api": {
			"imageType": "docker",
			"image": "simple-component:1.0.0",
			"description": "simple component"
		}
	},
	"actions": {
		"io.cnab.status": {}
	},
	"parameters": {
		"simple_component_port": {
			"type": "string",
			"defaultValue": "8080",
			"destination": {
				"env": "SIMPLE_COMPONENT_PORT"
			}
		}
	},
	"credentials": {}
}
```

### Invocation image

**NOTE** During this exercise, we will only focus on Docker base invocation images.

> The second artifact is the invocation image, which is a simple Docker image, able to install the application. It's not the application itself, see it as the installer binary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second artifact is the invocation image, which is a simple Docker image that is able to install the application. It's not the application itself; see it as the installer binary.
```

It must:
- contain a simple executable file at the path **`/cnab/app/run`**
- understand and react to actions declared in the `bundle.json`

Some parts are injected dynamically in the container by the runtime, like the credentials or the parameters.

When the `CNAB runtime` executes an action, it will follow these steps:
1. Parse and validate the bundle.json file
1. Resolve and validate (type, allowed values, required) the parameters
1. Create a container using the specified invocation image

> 1. Create environment variable with the installation name (`CNAB_INSTALLATION_NAME`), bundle name (`CNAB_BUNDLE_NAME`), bundle version (`CNAB_BUNDLE_VERSION`), and finally the action to execute (`CNAB_ACTION`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create environment variables for the installation name (`CNAB_INSTALLATION_NAME`), bundle name (`CNAB_BUNDLE_NAME`), bundle version (`CNAB_BUNDLE_VERSION`), and the action to execute (`CNAB_ACTION`)
```

1. Either create environment variables or mount files for parameters

> 1. Mount with `tmpfs`the credentials to the specified paths

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Mount the credentials (using `tmpfs`) to the specified paths
```

1. Run the container and execute `/cnab/app/run`
1. Display the container's stdout/stderr
1. Create or Update a claim to store the action result (`SUCCESS` or `FAILURE`), if it is not stateless

## Create a CNAB Bundle from scratch

> Let's put our hands on what we just saw an create our first CNAB!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's put our hands on what we just saw and create our first CNAB!
```

1. Create a new directory called `simple`

> 1. In it, copy/paste the previous bundle example in a new file `bundle.json`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. In it, copy/paste the previous bundle example in a new file named `bundle.json`
```

1. Still in `simple`, create the following hierarchy:  

    ```bash
    $ tree simple
    simple
    ├── bundle.json
    └── cnab
        ├── app
        │   └── run
        └── build
            └── Dockerfile

    3 directories, 3 files
    ```

> **EXERCISE**: Write the `simple/cnab/build/Dockerfile` to build the invocation image

Reviewer 2: To keep the exercises consistent with each other, I think this should be a heading. Probably a level 3, as we are still under "Create a CNAB from scratch"

```suggestion
### Creating the Dockerfile for the invocation image
``

**EXERCISE**: Write the `simple/cnab/build/Dockerfile` to build the invocation image

<details>
    <summary>Solution</summary>

```Dockerfile
FROM alpine:3.9.4
COPY cnab/app/run /cnab/app/run

> CMD /cnab/app/run

Reviewer: Maybe add a chmod +x here for windows users

```
</details>
<br/>

> **EXERCISE**: Fill the file `simple/cnab/app/run` with an **executable** shell script able to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Creating the CNAB run executable
```

- Read the environment variable `CNAB_ACTION` and print a specific action result on the standard output. It must also fail if the action is unknown. According to our `bundle.json`, it must understand `install`/`upgrade`/`uninstall`/`io.cnab.status` actions.

> - For each action print the installation name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- For each action, print the installation name.
```

- The `install` action must print the bundle name and the bundle version
- The `io.cnab.status` action must print the current port parameter

<details>
    <summary>Solution</summary>

```bash
#!/bin/sh

action=$CNAB_ACTION
name=$CNAB_INSTALLATION_NAME

case $action in
    install)
    echo "Install action"
    echo "Bundle $CNAB_BUNDLE_NAME version $CNAB_BUNDLE_VERSION"
    ;;
    uninstall)
    echo "Uninstall action"
    ;;
    upgrade)
    echo "Upgrade action"
    ;;
    io.cnab.status)
    echo "Status action"
    echo "current simple_component_port $SIMPLE_COMPONENT_PORT" 
    ;;
    *)
    echo "Failure: unknown action $action"
    exit 1
    ;;
esac
echo "Action $action complete for $name"
```
</details>

> <br/>

Reviewer 2: If we have the heading below, we don't need the `br` tag here.

```suggestion

```

> Let's build :hammer: our invocation image:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Building our invocation image
```

 => => transferring context: 86B                                                                                                                                                0.0s
 => [2/2] COPY cnab/app/run /cnab/app/run                                                                                                                                       0.1s
 => exporting to image                                                                                                                                                          0.0s
 => => exporting layers                                                                                                                                                         0.0s
 => => writing image sha256:03addb3d4bab4e50084921db9a14decf1bc7a86fe18d62c7e7676c33665e8e5c                                                                                    0.0s
 => => naming to docker.io/library/simple:1.0.0-invoc                                                                                                                           0.0s
```

> We have now a `bundle.json` AND an invocation image `simple:1.0.0-invoc`, congratulations you have made your first CNAB bundle :tada:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have now a `bundle.json` AND an invocation image `simple:1.0.0-invoc`! Congratulations you have made your first CNAB bundle!!! :tada:
```

It's time to play with it using Docker App!

## Docker App CNAB Runtime

### Use Docker App as a standard CNAB runtime

Docker App is a standard CNAB runtime. It can execute the following actions on any CNAB bundle:
- install
- upgrade
- io.cnab.status
- uninstall

**EXERCISE**: Let's play a little with our bundle, try to install, status, upgrade with another port, status again, then uninstall.

<details>
    <summary>Solution</summary>

> ```sh

Reviewer 2: May want to break this up to a few smaller code blocks, as I'm sure folks will miss commands and/or get lost in output vs commands they should run.

current simple_component_port 9090
Action io.cnab.status complete for my-simple-app

$ docker app uninstall my-simple-app
Uninstall action
Action uninstall complete for my-simple-app
Application "my-simple-app" uninstalled on context "dev"
```
</details>

### Docker App CNAB Architecture

Now lets dig a little into docker app CNAB implementation. We will use for that our previous `voting-app` application package. Try the following command:

```sh
$ cd voting-app.dockerapp
$ docker app bundle
Invocation image "voting-app:0.1.0-invoc" successfully built

$ docker image ls | grep voting-app
voting-app  0.1.0-invoc  84b5475a8069  7 minutes ago  49.1MB
```
It just generated a `bundle.json` and an invocation image.
Let's take a look at the invocation image:

```sh
$ docker run -it --rm voting-app:0.1.0-invoc /bin/sh
/cnab/app $ ls -la
total 42028
drwxr-xr-x    1 root     root          4096 Apr 28 22:17 .
drwxr-xr-x    1 root     root          4096 Apr 28 21:46 ..
-rw-r--r--    1 root     root            10 Jan  1  1970 .dockerignore
-rwxr-xr-x    1 root     root      43020288 Apr 28 21:46 run
drwxr-xr-x    2 root     root          4096 Apr 28 22:17 voting-app.dockerapp
```

> Docker app generated an invocation `FROM` a base docker app invocation image, containing the `run` binary. It copied your application package and all the attachments. The `run` backend nows how to install your package using `docker stack deploy`, and even `render` or `inspect` it. This `bundle` command is executed on-the-fly by each command, without you noticing it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Docker app generated an invocation `FROM` a base docker app invocation image, containing the `run` binary. It copied your application package and all the attachments. The `run` backend knows how to install your package using `docker stack deploy`, and even `render` or `inspect` it. This `bundle` command is executed on-the-fly by each command, without you noticing it.
```
